Welcome to Oberon_0

This tutorial introduces the concepts of the Oberon user interface necessary 
to continue the installation process.  If you are familiar with Oberon, skip it.

The Oberon screen is divided into two vertical tracks which contain viewers 
displaying text or graphics.  All text can be edited, and a text can be stored 
to or loaded from disk.  A text viewer contains a scroll bar at the left and a 
menu bar at the top with the title of the text on the left.  Clicking with a 
mouse button in the scroll bar will reposition the text view.

If you have just booted Oberon_0, the track on the right (system track) will 
contain two text viewers.  The top one is the system log, which is used by 
the system for displaying messages for the user.  The bottom viewer displays 
the text called "Install.Tool", which contains instructions and commands for 
the installation process.  The left-hand track (user track) will have this text.

Experiment with scrolling a text viewer by clicking with the left, middle and 
right buttons in the scrollbar of the bottom viewer.  The left button moves 
the line next to the cursor to the top of the viewer, the right button moves 
backwards in the text.  The small horizontal line in the scroll bar displays the 
relative position of the current view in the complete text.  The middle mouse 
button repositions the text so that this line falls under the mouse cursor.

Point the mouse cursor to the command "System.Time" at the top of the log 
text and click the middle mouse button.  If your mouse only has two buttons, 
the keyboard Ctrl key stands in as the middle mouse button.  Middle clicking
on a command causes it to be executed.  The System.Time command displays
the current time at the end of the log text, complete with a fresh command 
for you to execute.  As you can see, Oberon is driven by commands that can
be embedded in any text, even text generated by a command!

Experiment with entering and deleting text in the system log.  Place the text 
cursor by clicking the left button in the system log.  Type some text into the 
log and use the backspace key to delete it.

Press Ctrl-Break.  A new viewer called "Trap" will appear at the bottom of 
the right-hand track.  This type of viewer provides invaluable debugging 
information whenever a run-time error occurs in the Oberon system.  
Experiment with resizing the viewer by pointing the mouse to the top half 
of its title bar and then pressing and holding down the left mouse button. 
Move the mouse cursor up or down and then release the left button to resize 
the viewer.  When you have practiced this a few times, click the command 
"System.Close" in the title bar of the trap viewer to close it.  You are now 
ready to continue installation, so you can also close this viewer and proceed
to step 1.
